# NixOS-PXE-installer

This collection of Nix expressions creates the files that are
necessary for a fully automated installation of a host with a
pre-defined NixOS configuration using PXE.

The boot process is as follows.

The install client is configured to perform a PXE boot over one of its
network devices.  This will trigger a DHCP request to obtain the IP
address, netmask, default gateway as well as the name of the boot
loader and the IP address of the TFTP server from which it can be
downloaded.

The EFI firmware will then proceed to fetch the boot loader image via
TFTP.  In our case, the boot loader image to be used is created by

```
$ nix-build -A bootLoader
```

This will create the symlink `result` to point to the image in the Nix
store

```
$ ls -l result/
total 6160
-r--r--r-- 1 root nixbld 6302208 Jan  1  1970 bootx64.efi
-r--r--r-- 1 root nixbld     962 Jan  1  1970 grub.cfg
```

The file `bootx64.efi` needs to be transferred to the TFTP server.
The file `grub.cfg` is the GRUB configuration that was used to build
the loader.

The GRUB loader with EFI support can access the host's NIC through the
devices named `efinet` followed by a number.  The GRUB command
`net_bootp` initiates a BOOTP request, starting with efinet0 and
iterating through the interfaces until it gets a response (or the list
is exhausted in which case the boot process stops).

Even though the system sends a pure BOOTP request, it does expect a
DHCP reply, which is incorrect and requires support on the server
side.  On the ISC DHCP server, this is accomplished with the option
`always-reply-rfc1048 on`.

In our case, the boot loader needs the name of a TFTP server from
which it can download a Linux kernel.  Due to another quirk in GRUB,
the required DHCP option (66) can only be obtained if the interface is
known in advance.  The system uses `efinet0` per default, which can be
changed by the NixOS option `nfsroo.bootLoader.efinetDHCPInterface`.

The name of the TFTP server is resolved via DNS and the boot loader
proceeds to download the kernel by the name `/nixos/bzImage`, i.e. the
TFTP server must export the kernel by this exact path name.

The kernel image is generated by

```
$ nix-build -A kernel
```

The kernel is called with the following options:

```
console=ttyS0,115200n8 ip=:::::ethX:dhcp: root=/dev/nfs init=/nix/store/...
```

where `ethX` is `eth0` by default and can be changed via the NixOS
option `nfsroot.bootLoader.linuxPnPInterface`.  This triggers the IP
PnP functionality in the kernel, which performs yet another DHCP
request on the given interface.  Note that we are now in the interface
namespace of the kernel and we need to know which name it will assign
to the interface.

The kernel asks for the DHCP option that specifies the path of the
root file system to mount and proceeds to mount it.

The image of the root file system is generated by

```
$ nix-build -A tarball
```

It must be exported read-only to the client by something like

```
/srv/nixos/nfsroot 130.59.0.0/16(async,ro)
```

in `/etc/exports`.

It then executes the program specified in the `init` kernel option,
which will convert the read-only NFS root file system to a writeable
file system through unionfs-fuse.

Finally, the actual NixOS installer is called, which partitions and
formats the local disk and unpacks the tarball that contains the NixOS
system with the custom configuration onto the disk.

The hardware-dependent NixOS configuration is created by
`nixos-generate-config`, which will create the file
`/etc/nixos/hardware-configuration.nix` on the new system.  It will
also provide a basic network configuration in
`/etc/nixos/networking.nix` according to the NixOS options
`customInstaller.networking.{useDHCP, staticInterfaceFromDHCP}`.
